##### Mathematical modelling
Suppose we have a large population of healthy individuals who are susceptible to an infectious disease. Suppose further that a number of infected individuals (who are infectious) enter the population at time t=0. We want to know how the disease will spread. Will case numbers rise? Will there be an epidemic?

In a scenario such as this, the role of an applied mathematician is to try to make reasonable and well-founded predictions about the system’s evolution in time, i.e. how the situation will develop in the future. In our case, the system in question is a population in which a number of individuals are infectious. We are interested in predicting what that number will be in the coming days and weeks.

To do this, the applied mathematician designs a mathematical model, i.e. an abstract quantitative description of the system. We only pay attention to details of the system that are relevant to the predictions we want to make. For example, in our case, we are certainly interested in the daily case numbers of the disease but we do not care about the surnames of the newly infected individuals. Deciding which details of a system to include in a model and which to omit is an important step in the modelling process.

##### The branching process model
We will call the number of infectious cases on day t by the name I_t. We assume that we know the value of I_0 and our task is then to predict I_1, I_2, I_3, etc. Based on our knowledge of the disease itself (which virologists can give us) and our knowledge of how individuals in the population interact with each other, we can take a well-educated guess for the expected number of susceptible individuals that each infectious individual will infect over the full course of the latter’s infection. This is called the reproduction number of the disease and is denoted by R_t. For example, we might estimate that each infected individual will, on average, pass the infection on to 3 people between the time at which he is first infected and the time at which he recovers. For simplicity, let us assume that the infection always lasts just one day and that every infectious person infects exactly 3 new people over the course of his infection. These assumptions lead to a deterministic model of exponential growth in case numbers, where I_t is predicted to be I_0*3^t. This is the simplest kind of branching process model. The branching process model that we use in this application, however, is more complex and more realistic in two ways.

First, we acknowledge that we cannot predict the future exactly; that is, we introduce randomness into the model. So rather than assuming that every infectious individual will infect exactly R_t = 3 new people, we assume that the number of transmissions per infectious case follows a probability distribution with expected value R_t = 3. One consequence of this newly-introduced randomness is that our model may give different predictions if it is run multiple times with the same inputs. This is not a bad thing, but rather reflects that randomness exists in a population of individuals and that our model can never account for every single detail of such a complex system.

Second, we do not assume that the infection lasts only one day, meaning that an infectious individual can transmit the disease during a window of several days. This is more realistic for most infectious diseases, e.g. COVID-19 has an infectious period of around 10 days. This requires us to make assumptions on when transmissions occur during the infectious period of an individual. We do this by introducing the concept of the serial interval, which just means the probability distribution for the number of days it takes after the infector shows symptoms for a disease recipient to show symptoms. For example, one might assume, given that an infection occurs, that the recipient shows symptoms 3 days after the infector shows symptoms with a probability of 35%, which we write as w_3 = 0.35.

With the assumptions we have made so far, our branching process model can now predict the number of new cases on day t, i.e. I_t, given that it knows I_0, I_1, I_2, … , I_(t-1). Our model's prediction is a number drawn from a Poisson distribution with the following mean:
$$ \mathbb{E}(I_t) = R_t \sum_{s=1}^t w_s I_{t-s} = R_t \left( w_1 I_{t-1} + w_2 I_{t-2} + ... + w_t I_0 \right) $$
The $\mathbb{E}$ stands for "expected value" -- if our model was deterministic (no randomness), then this expected value would be the model's prediction for I_t every time. Given that our model is not deterministic, but rather stochastic (i.e. it includes random effects), it makes its prediction for I_t by drawing a random number from a Poisson distribution with this expected value.
