##### BranchPro: inference of $R\_t$

In order to make predictions about how case numbers will evolve in the future, we require an estimate of the reproduction number $R\_t$. One common method of estimating $R\_t$ is to infer it (using Bayesian inference) from recent incidence data. Below, we do just that: given the incidence data for 30 days, we can infer the value of $R\_t$ over that time period. In a sense, this is the opposite (a.k.a. the inverse) of the *forward model*, where we used a known/assumed value for the reproduction number to predict future case numbers; now, we are using past case numbers to estimate the reproduction number. This is called an *inverse probem*.

To infer estimates for $R\_t$ over time, we choose a time period that is much shorter than the total time period for which we have case data. We call the length of this shorter period $\tau$ (i.e. the Greek letter tau); when we are inferring a value for $R\_t$, i.e. the reproduction number on day $t$, then we make the assumption that the reproduction number was constant over the last $\tau$ days, i.e. $R\_{t-\tau+1} = R\_{t-\tau+2} = \dots = R\_t$. In our case, we wish to use case data from the last 30 days and infer $R\_t$ over that period. We might choose $\tau$ to be 5. Then when we are inferring $R\_16$, the assumption is $R\_{12} = R\_{13} = R\_{14} = R\_{15} = R\_{16} = R$, where this final $R$ is unknown. Our model can then infer (using methods from Bayesian inference, a probabilistic framework that is beyond the scope of this description) which reproduction number value $R$ would be most likely to lead to the case numbers observed over days 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. This best estimate is represented (for each day) by the black line in the plot below.

The model also calculates a 95% *confidence interval* for the reproduction number; this simply tells us that we are 95% sure that the value for $R$ (the reproduction number value assumed to be constant over the last $\tau$ days) lies between a lower and an upper bound. So, for example, for day 16, our model might calculate that $R\_{16}$ was most likely equal to 1.3 and that we are 95% sure that it lay between 1.0 and 1.5. This confidence interval is an important output of the model because it highlights that we can only *estimate* values for $R\_t$ and also *quantifies the uncertainty* of the model.
